# INTRODUCTION

## The Kelsey Papers

In the year 1926 certain documents were presented to the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland by Major A. F. Dobbs, of Castle Dobbs, Carrickfergus. These had been collected by Arthur Dobbs, author and statesman, who in addition to displaying varied interests, and no small influence, in colonial affairs during the eighteenth century---he was Governor of North Carolina from 1754 until his death in 1765---distinguished himself as a critic of the administration of the Hudson's Bay Company.

In the Dobbs Collection were found _The Kelsey Papers_, now classified in the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland, Belfast, as D.O.D. No. 162, and here published jointly by the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland and the Public Archives of Canada. These papers---journals, letters and memoranda---are, it seems probable, in the handwriting of Henry Kelsey himself. A comparison with his signature attached to certain letters in Hudson's Bay House is, however, inconclusive. The text here used was transcribed from the original under the supervision of Dr. James F. Kenney of the Public Archives of Canada. Dr. Kenney has also seen the present volume through the press.

_The Kelsey Papers_ are in one volume of 128 pages, in a coarse paper cover, probably the original binding. At the top of the first page, in the same handwriting as what follows, is the title "Henry Kelsey his Book being ye Gift of James Hubbud in the year of our Lord 1693." In that year Kelsey was in England---he had returned from Hudson Bay in 1692. Who James Hubbud was we do not know.[^intro-1] It seems probable that Kelsey's words record merely a gift of a blank copy-book from a friend. It is obvious that the majority of the texts which follow are transcripts, and the probable inference is that they were copied by Kelsey for his own private use, the originals going into the files of the Hudson's Bay Company. The first document in point of time is the Churchill Journal of 1689, but the rhymed introduction to that of 1691 has first place in the manuscript volume.

[^intro-1]: There was an Isaac Hubbud in the service of the Company in IIudson Bay in 1689. See p. 31 *infra*.

How The Kelsey Papers came into the possession of Arthur Dobbs is not now known, and it would be rash, perhaps, to conjecture. The last entry in them is of date 1722, and Dobbs's controversy with the Hudson's Bay Company began only after Kelsey's death. Internal evidence in Dobbs's own writings is fragmentary and almost altogether negative. In Dobbs's book of 1744---_An Account of the Countries adjoining to Hudson' s Bay_---there is no reference to Kelsey. It seems safe to say that he knew nothing of his papers at that time. By 1749, on the other hand, Dobbs had not only heard of Kelsey but was prepared to impugn the whole account of him which the Company had prepared for the Parliamentary Committee of that date. In the _Dobbs Collection_ is a manuscript _Commentary on the Case of the Hudson's Bay Company as presented to the Committee of 1749_. This is in the handwriting of Arthur Dobbs himself, and it is followed so closely by Robson in his _Account of Six Years Residence in Hudson's-Bay_, 1752, Appendix I, that a common origin seems self-evident. It is possible that Dobbs's _Commentary_ is a paraphrase of Robson, made at some period between 1752, when Robson's book was published, and 1754, when Dobbs left for North Carolina. Internal evidence, on the other hand, indicates the reverse, for the Robson _Appendix_ shows the marks of careful literary craftsmanship. Both agree, however, upon the story that appeared in print for the first time in Robson and formed the foundation, as we shall see, of a Kelsey tradition which has survived in one form or another for nearly 200 years. Impugning the Company's claim to have sent Kelsey to the prairies upon a journey of discovery, Dobbs charged that "Geyer [the Governor at York Fort] did not send him up, but that upon some Boyish misbehaviour he had been severely corrected by the Governrs. orders and being very great [sic] and Intimate with the Indians he took an opportunity of running away with them; so that Geyer finding the Company desirous of sending up upon Discoveries made a Merit of his going up and said he sent him up." This story Robson claims to have heard during his stay of six years on Hudson Bay---a tradition which we must presently examine. It will be conceded that this story could scarcely have survived an honest examination  of _The Kelsey Papers_. So too with other details of the _Commentary_ which Dobbs must have added in good faith. He charges that Geyer "did not comply with their former Instructions" of 1688 to send Kelsey to the Churchill---"which was not Done [he adds] and no reason assigned for that neglect." _The Kelsey Papers_ prove not only that the instructions were complied with but that the Churchill journey was made, and recorded in minute detail, by Kelsey himself. The meagre conclusion may perhaps be allowed that _The Kelsey Papers_ came into Dobbs's possession only when his bitterest attacks upon the Company were being abandoned. Did they contribute in any degree to that result?

## The Kelsey Tradition

The true story of Henry Kelsey supplants a myth which has been in historical currency for nearly two hundred years---a curious instance of cumulative prejudice and inaccuracy.

Since Robson's _Account of Six Years Residence in Hudson's Bay_[^intro-2] the claim of the Hudson's Bay Company that Kelsey was sent by them "to travel and to penetrate into the Country," and that he "chearfully undertook the Journey," has been met with incredulity. The tradition arose that Kelsey was "but a boy" who had run away from the harsh discipline of Governor Geyer at York Fort at the mouth of the Nelson; and that the Company "made a merit of Kelsey's going up" by fabricating the garbled pages of his _Journal_ in order to conceal their failure to explore the vast regions claimed by their Charter. "From many circumstances mentioned in this journal," wrote Robson, "I no more believe that it is Kelsey's than it is mine."[^intro-3] This story has since been embellished with much ingenuity, both in fiction and in sober history. The Kelsey Papers now supply not only the truth about the journeys of 1690-2 but an outline, at times in great detail, of Kelsey's activities from the time he entered the service of the Company in 1684 to the year 1722, four years after he became Governor of York Fort.

[^intro-2]: Joseph Robson, London, 1752.

[^intro-3]: *Id*., p. 73.

The name of Henry Kelsey[^intro-4] appears for the first time in print in the _Report_ of the British Parliamentary Committee (April 24, 1749) "Appointed to enquire into the State and Condition of the Countries adjoining to Hudson's Bay."[^intro-5] This enquiry was the outcome of one of the most determined attacks ever made upon the Hudson's Bay Company as to the validity of their Charter. After fourteen years of agitation, the voyage of the _Dobbs-Galley_ and the _California_ had been, in 1746-7, undertaken by public subscription for the discovery of the North-West Passage. In this project Arthur Dobbs, in whose library at Castle Dobbs, Carrickfergus, were found _The Kelsey Papers_, was undoubtedly the moving spirit; and his own book, _An Account of the Countries adjoining to Hudson's Bay_, published in 1744, sufficiently illustrates his motives. Another shareholder was Henry Ellis, afterwards Governor of Georgia, friend of William Knox the confidant of Grenville and Lord North, and for a time Governor of Nova Scotia (1761-3) after the death of Lawrence. Ellis's account in _A Voyage to Hudson's-Bay_,[^intro-6] published in 1748, and two volumes published by William Drage, "Clerk of the California" in 1749,[^intro-7] attest the public interest as well as the less disinterested motives of Dobbs and his associates in the contest against the Company. In 1748 a petition found its way to the law officers of the Crown, and to a Parliamentary Committee. The burden of the petition was for "the like Privileges and Royalties as were granted to the said Company"; and the main charge was that "they have not discovered, nor sufficiently attempted to discover, the North-west Passage into the _South Seas_.[^intro-8] It was in rebuttal of this charge that the Company submitted what purported to be "A JOURNAL of a Voyage and Journey undertaken by *Henry Kellsey*, to discover, and endeavour to bring to a Commerce, the *Naywatamee Poets*, 1691."[^intro-9]

[^intro-4]: Journals, letters, etc., in _The Kelsey Papers_ are uniformly signed "Kelsey." The _Journal_ in the _Report_ of 1749 is attributed to "Henry Kellsey," the spelling retained by Burpee in _The Search for the Western Sea_, pp. 96-113; the letters---no fewer than eight on pp. 254, 274-5 of the _Report_---uniformly, use the form "Kelsey," and the same spelling is found in Kelsey's own letters in Hudson's Bay House.

[^intro-5]: _Reports from Committees of the House of Commons_, vol. II (1803), pp. 213-286.

[^intro-6]: Ellis sailed with the expedition "in quality of _Agent for the Committee_." _Voyage_, p. 104.

[^intro-7]: _An Account of a Voyage for the Discovery of a North-West Passage_, 2 Vols., Lond., 1748.

[^intro-8]: _Report_, 1749, p. 285.

[^intro-9]: *Id*., p. 276. "Poets" seems to have been a suffix attached to the names of several Indian tribes as these were written by the English in Hudson Bay. Kelsey speaks of the "Naywatame Poets" and the "Mountain Poets," and in the records of the Company are found also the designations "Assinae Poets" and "Kanebickapoets." *Cf*. Gideon D. Scull, _Voyages of Peter Esprit Radisson_ (Boston: The Prince Society, 1885) p. 345.

The Journal was accompanied by circumstantial evidence. Preceding it in the _Report_ (Appendix No. XX VII) are excerpts from letters between the Company and various Governors on the Bay from May 9, 1676, to June 4, 1719.[^intro-10] As early as 1683 Governor Sargeant Was instructed to "choose out from amongst our Servants such as are best qualified with Strength of Body and the Country Language, to travel and to penetrate into the Country." "For their Encouragement, we shall plentifully reward them." Nothing, however, could induce them to stir from the Bay. Sargeant reported in 1685 that neither the four men specifically chosen "nor any of your Servants will travel up the Country." Finally in June, 1688, the Company directed Governor Geyer to send "the Boy *Henry Kelsey* . . . . . to *Churchill River* with *Thomas Savage*, because we are informed he is a very active Lad, delighting much in Indians Company, being never better pleased than when he is travelling amongst them." How did this "very active Lad" first attract the notice of the Company? Who was "Thomas Savage"? Was Kelsey sent to the Churchill? How did he come to undertake the journey to the prairies in search of the "Naywatamee Poets"? The answers to these questions, as we shall see, are to be found for the first time in _The Kelsey Papers_.

[^intro-10]: *Id*., pp. 273-6.

But there were several features of the _Journal_ which invited suspicion, and the fact that the enemies of the Company were allowed to exploit these with impunity was taken in itself as *prima facie* evidence. The title of the Journal appears in triplicate and the text in duplicate in the Report of 1749. The first title in the _List of the Appendix_ (p. 236) and in the text (Number XXVII, p. 273) was evidently intended to cover all the evidence submitted by the Company with regard to Kelsey. It reads: "A JOURNAL of *Henry Kellsey* in the Years 1691, and 1692, sent by the *Hudson's Bay* Company to make Discoveries, and increase their Trade Inland from the Bay." Number XXVIII is "A JOURNAL of a Voyage and Journey undertaken by *Henry Kellsey*, to discover, arid endeavour to bring to a Commerce, the *Naywatamee* Poets, 1691." It is dated "July the 5th." Under the same number in the Appendix is a "Duplicate" dated "July 15th, 1692"---obviously the same journal with trifling variations in both title and text. The first closes with the words, "Sir, I remain, Your most Obedient, and Faithful Servant, Henry Kellsey"; the second, "I rest, Honourable Masters, Your most Obedient, and Faithful Servant, At Command, Henry Kellsey." Assuming that the Company and not the printer was responsible for these irregularities, Robson ingeniously implied an attempt to pass off the record as "two journals; one in 1691 in compliance with the governor, and the other in 1692 in obedience to the Company."[^intro-11]

[^intro-11]: Robson, *op*. *cit*., Appendix, p, 23.

It is noteworthy that neither Arthur Dobbs, among whose papers at Carrickfergus _The Kelsey Papers_ were found, nor Ellis and Drage, so far as we know, ever impugned the Kelsey _Journal_ in print, though Dobbs in his _Commentary_ (already noted) is as sceptical as Robson himself with regard to its authenticity. It is noteworthy, too, that Dobbs had no comment whatever to make on Kelsey before the Parliamentary Committee (p. 228). In 1752, however, Joseph Robson---also a witness in 1749---in his _Account of Six Years Residence in Hudson's-Bay_, attacked not only the authenticity of the Kelsey _Journal_ but the *bona-fides* of the Company's correspondence. Robson was a stone-mason---he built much of Fort Prince of Wales at Churchill---who wrote under the title of "Late Surveyor and Supervisor of the Buildings to the Hudson's-bay Company." How Umfreville, who wrote in 1790, could refer to him as "a candid, true, and impartial writer"[^intro-12] it is hard to understand. Both, however, had quarrelled with the Company. In truth, Robson's rancour against the "sea officers principles" in vogue at Hudson Bay is self-evident in his own scathing narrative, and he himself suggests that the Company induced

[^intro-12]: _The Present State of Hudson's Bay_, Edward Umfreville, London, 1790, p. 4.

